Grid cells in the medial entorhinal cortex (MEC) are an important component of the brain's entorhinal-hippocampal system for spatial memory and navigation. The firing fields of grid cells form a striking hexagonal lattice within open-field environments (Hafting et al., 2005; Rowland et al., 2016). Grid cells are believed to be organized into discrete modules, where the hexagonal lattice of each grid cell within a module has a similar spacing and orientation but may differ in phase (Stensola et al., 2012). Since the MEC is the primary source of spatial information for hippocampal place cells, it is important to understand the behavior of grid cells in order to understand the flow of information through the entorhinal-hippocampal system (Yim et al., 2021).

Grid cells are generally believed to play an important role in path integration, which typically means the brain's ability to update its internal representation of the animal's location within an environment using only self-motion cues, such as the animal's running speed and heading direction (McNaughton et al., 2006; Savelli and Knierim, 2019). However, grid cell activity is also dependent on allocentric cues, such as cue cards placed on the floor or walls of an environment (Fyhn et al., 2007). The manner in which grid cells incorporate allocentric information with the internal neural processing involved in path integration is an active area of research (Knierim et al., 2014; Campbell et al., 2018; Jacob et al., 2019).

The most widely accepted theory regarding grid cell behavior centers on the broad theory of continuous attractor neural networks (CANNs). A CANN is a network of neurons whose population activity vector converges in time to a continuous low-dimensional manifold (Trappenberg, 2002; Wu et al., 2008; Knierim and Zhang, 2012; Poll et al., 2016; Geiger and Hedrick, 2021). According to this theory, the instantaneous population activity of grid cells within a module can be arranged as a hexagonal lattice, and self-motion cues drive translations of this lattice (Burak and Fiete, 2009). Hence, the population activity vector can be described using only the two-dimensional phase of the lattice, resulting in a two-dimensional manifold.

Although it is difficult to directly test the theory of attractor networks, there is experimental evidence that grid cell modules can be considered CANNs. In particular, the spacing and orientation are roughly the same for all grid cells within a module (Stensola et al., 2012; Yoon et al., 2013). Though the hexagonal lattice can expand, contract, rotate, or even become distorted between environments, these changes to the spacing and orientation tend to be coherent for all grid cells within a module (Yoon et al., 2013). Similarly, the relative phase between modular grid cells tends to be constant across environments, even while the lattice of individual cells may shift (Yoon et al., 2013). Accordingly, there are several computational models for grid cells based on the theory of CANNs (Fuhs and Touretzky, 2006; McNaughton et al., 2006; Guanella et al., 2007; Burak and Fiete, 2009). All such models assume that the population maintains a rigid hexagonal lattice in any environment, and translations of this lattice lead to a hexagonal lattice in the firing patterns of individual grid cells.

In sufficiently large open-field environments, the characteristic hexagonal lattice is easily observable in recordings of individual grid cells. The spatial structure is much less clear, however, when the animal is placed on a track, since the animal's trajectory undersamples any underlying two-dimensional spatial pattern. In these environments, more sophisticated analytical tools are needed to determine the underlying spatial structure in the grid cell activity patterns. For example, Fourier analysis has revealed that grid cell activity on a linear track is most likely a linear slice of an underlying hexagonal lattice (Yoon et al., 2016). Similarly, approaches from topology have led to the conclusion that grid cell activity on a pinwheel is part of an underlying hexagonal lattice (Gardner et al., 2022). A recent study, however, concluded that grid cells behave differently on a circular track, in which grid cell activity does not appear to be a circular slice of an underlying hexagonal lattice (Jacob et al., 2019). This latter conclusion challenges the CANN theory for grid cells.

Understanding the behavior of grid cells on a circular track is particularly important, as many experimental studies constrain the animal's path to a circular track (Knierim et al., 2014; Campbell et al., 2018; Jacob et al., 2019; Savelli and Knierim, 2019). Such an environment is particularly useful in studies of path integration, as there is no physical discontinuity that would reset the cellular estimate of the animal's position.

In this study we use a novel technique to further analyze the data of grid cells recorded on a circular track, presented in Jacob et al. (2019). In particular, we focus on the reported observation that grid cell firing patterns are not a circular slice of a hexagonal lattice (Jacob et al., 2019). This claim was based on two observations. First, they found that the Fourier transform of the linearized activity does not have the characteristic three peaks expected of grid cells on a linear track (Yoon et al., 2016). However, these three peaks are due to the specific geometry of a linear slice of a hexagonal lattice and are not expected given the geometry of a circular track. Second, they observed a low correlation between the grid cell activity on the circular track and the corresponding slice of the grid cell activity in the open arena. However, they did not examine whether the activity on the circular track could be a slice of a hexagonal lattice that differs in spacing, orientation, or phase from that in the open arena. (See Discussion for a further description of this study's results.)

We use a novel approach to analyze the same data recorded in Jacob et al. (2019) in order to clarify how one should interpret grid cell activity on a circular track. Rather than analyzing individual grid cell activity patterns as was previously done, we compute the 2D population autocorrelation, i.e. the sum of the 2D autocorrelations of individual grid cells within a module. We begin by applying this novel approach to simulated data and exploring its robustness. We then show how the population autocorrelation reveals an underlying hexagonal lattice in the populations of grid cells recorded from two animals. We also use the population autocorrelation to infer the spacing and orientation of the population lattice, revealing how the lattice differs across environments. The population autocorrelation can only reveal an underlying spatial pattern if the firing fields are stable across laps, which was not apparent in the original analysis of individual grid cells (Jacob et al., 2019). We analyze the spatial stability by computing the population autocorrelation on the linearized track, showing that the grid code is an allocentric code at the level of the population. Unlike other methods used to analyze grid cells in undersampled environments (Gardner et al., 2022), our approach can be used when there are a limited number of grid cells and noisy data. Altogether, these results further support the attractor network theory for grid cells and provides a powerful method for analyzing grid cell activity in undersampled environments.

bioRxiv preprint doi: [https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.14.557783](https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.09.14.557783); this version posted September 15, 2023. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.