Anorhinal grid cells tile a horizontal environment's surface with a hexagonal-close-packed (HCP) array of approximately circular firing fields, the regular spacing of which is widely thought to provide a distance metric supporting the brain's spatial cognitive map'. An unresolved but central question is whether this map can be three-dimensional (3D), as befits the behavioral ecology of most vertebrates. Hippocampal place cells, the core of the cognitive map in mammals' and probably birds' (but see ref. ), form spatially defined firing fields in a volumetric environment in both bats1 and rats', suggesting a capacity for the vertebrate brain to fully map volumetric space. We investigated whether this map could be founded on a regular 3D entorhinal grid.

Footnote 1: Department of Experimental Psychology, Institute of Behavioural Neuroscience, University College London, London, UK, ‘Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA, ‘Eke-mail: roddy.m.grieves@dartmouth.edu; k.jeffery@ucl.ac.uk

Theoretical considerations suggest that in a volumetric space, the corresponding (and theoretically optimal) grid structure for 3D spatial mapping would be an HCP or face-centered-cubic (FCC) lattice of firing fields2-13 (Fig. 1a). However, previous studies on vertical surfaces found that grid fields formed vertical stripes2 or expanded blobs2-13 depending on the locomotor affordances (movement constraints) of the surface. In the present study, using wireless telemetry in rats exploring a cubic lattice maze (Fig. 1b-e), we investigated whether grid fields are indeed close packed (that is, optimally organized), randomly dispersed or somewhere in between (irregular with local order). We show that grid cells do stably express focal, 3D fields, but these are larger, more variably sized/shaped and more widely spaced than on a horizontal surface, and are distributed in a random pattern throughout the volume. We explore the implications of this for spatial computations.